doc: Added 54H FLPR documentation (#18781)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/app_dev/device_guides/working_with_nrf/nrf54h/ug_nrf54h20_flpr.rst

.. _ug_nrf54h20_flpr:

Working with the FLPR core
##########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. note::
   The FLPR core support in the |NCS| is currently :ref:`experimental<software_maturity>`.

The nRF54H20 SoC includes a dedicated VPR CPU, based on RISC-V architecture, known as the *fast lightweight peripheral processor* (FLPR).
The FLPR core can be used to manage specific peripherals through the appropriate Zephyr Device Driver API:

> * ##List to be completed

Reviewer: uart is for sure supported (UARTE120)

Author: @hubertmis @shanthanordic Any additional inputs?

.. _vpr_flpr_nrf54h20_initiating:

> Using FLPR with Zephyr multithreaded mode

Reviewer 2: I would rephrase the title. Right now it's ambiguous if FLPR or FLPR's owner runs multithreaded Zephyr. How about "Zephyr multithreaded mode on FLPR"? Or "Using Zephyr multithreaded mode on FLPR"?

*****************************************

The FLPR core can function as a general-purpose core, running under the full Zephyr kernel.

> Building the FLPR target is similar to building the application core, but the application core build must include an overlay that enables the FLPR core.

Author: Please recheck

Bootstrapping the FLPR core
===========================

The |NCS| provides a FLPR snippet that adds the overlay needed for bootstrapping the FLPR core.
The primary purpose of this snippet is to enable the transfer of the FLPR code to the designated memory region (if required) and initiate the FLPR core.

When building for the ``nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr`` target, a minimal sample is automatically loaded onto the application core.
For more details, see :ref:`building_nrf54h_app_flpr_core`.

Memory allocation
*****************

Running the FLPR CPU can lead to increased latency when accessing ``RAM_21``.
To mitigate this, you should use ``RAM_21`` exclusively for FLPR code, FLPR data, and non-time-sensitive information from the application CPU.

> For data that requires strict access times, such as DMA buffers and application CPU data used in low-latency ISRs, you should use ``RAM_0x``.

Reviewer: @hubertmis needs your input

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For data that requires strict access times, such as CPU data used in low-latency ISRs, you should use local RAM or, when greater latency is acceptable, ``RAM_0x``. The DMA buffers should be placed in memory designed to a given peripheral.
```

.. _building_nrf54h:

Building and programming with the nRF54H20 DK
*********************************************

.. note::
   The FLPR core support in the |NCS| is currently :ref:`experimental<software_maturity>`.

> Depending on the sample, you may need to program only the application core or both the FLPR and application cores.

Author: Please recheck

Additionally, the process will vary depending on whether you are working with a single-image or multi-image build.

.. note::
   The following instructions do not cover the scenario of multi-image single-core builds.

Building for the application core only
======================================

Building for the application core follows the default building process for the |NCS|.
For detailed instructions, refer to the :ref:`building` page.

.. _building_nrf54h_app_flpr_core:

Building for both the application and FLPR core
===============================================

Building for both the application core and the FLPR core differs from the default |NCS| procedure.
Additional configuration is required to enable the FLPR core.

This section explains how to build and program both cores, covering separate builds and sysbuild configurations.
The FLPR core supports two variants:

> * ``nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr``: FLPR runs from SRAM (recommended method).

Reviewer 2: Being precise here would help to understand the partitioning recommendations described earlier.

```suggestion
* ``nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr``: FLPR runs from RAM_21 (recommended method).
```

      To build and flash both images, run the following command to perform a :ref:`pristine build <zephyr:west-building>`:

      .. code-block:: console

         west build -p -b nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr
         west flash

   .. group-tab:: Using an application that supports multi-image builds

      If your application involves creating custom images for both the application core and the FLPR core, disable the VPR bootstrapping sample by setting the ``SB_CONFIG_VPR_LAUNCHER`` option to ``n`` when building for the FLPR target.
      For more details, see :ref:`how to configure Kconfig <configuring_kconfig>`.

      To build and flash both images, run the following command to perform a :ref:`pristine build <zephyr:west-building>`:

      .. code-block:: console

         west build -p -b nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr -- -DSB_CONFIG_VPR_LAUNCHER=n
         west flash

Separate images
---------------

You can build and program the application sample and the FLPR sample as separate images using either the |nRFVSC| or the command line.
To use nRF Util, see `nRF Util`_.
Depending on the method you select, complete the following steps:

.. tabs::

>    .. group-tab:: nRF Connect for VS Code

Reviewer: Not familiar with VSCode flow, needs to be validated by someone else

Reviewer 3: From the point of view of vscode The user can use create a separate build configuration and select flipr as the target.

In that case the command we run will be 

west build --build-dir <build> <app-dir> -pristine -target nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr .....

One minor comment I why I sysbuild not being used? was sysbuil not created for such a case?

.. _ug_nrf54h20_flpr:

Working with the FLPR core
##########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

.. note::
   The FLPR core support in the |NCS| is currently :ref:`experimental<software_maturity>`.

The nRF54H20 SoC includes a dedicated VPR CPU, based on RISC-V architecture, known as the *fast lightweight peripheral processor* (FLPR).
The FLPR core can be used to manage specific peripherals through the appropriate Zephyr Device Driver API:

* UARTE120

##List to be completed

.. _vpr_flpr_nrf54h20_initiating:

Using Zephyr multithreaded mode on FLPR
***************************************

The FLPR core can operate as a general-purpose core, running under the full Zephyr kernel.

> To enable the FLPR core, always include an overlay in the application core build that configures and builds the FLPR target.

Reviewer 4: That is incorrect. The overlay only enables a driver on application core side that starts the FLPR (and copies code for non-xip variant).

Author: Shantha asked for this edit @shanthanordic @masz-nordic  Could you please clarify this?

Author: reverted

===========================

The |NCS| provides a FLPR snippet that adds the overlay needed for bootstrapping the FLPR core.
The primary purpose of this snippet is to enable the transfer of the FLPR code to the designated memory region (if required) and initiate the FLPR core.

When building for the ``nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr`` target, a minimal sample is automatically loaded onto the application core.
For more details, see :ref:`building_nrf54h_app_flpr_core`.

Memory allocation
*****************

Running the FLPR CPU can lead to increased latency when accessing ``RAM_21``.
To mitigate this, you should use ``RAM_21`` exclusively for FLPR code, FLPR data, and non-time-sensitive information from the application CPU.
For data that requires strict access times, such as CPU data used in low-latency ISRs, you should use local RAM or, when greater latency is acceptable, ``RAM_0x``.
The DMA buffers should be placed in memory designed to a given peripheral.

.. _building_nrf54h:

Building and programming with the nRF54H20 DK
*********************************************

.. note::
   The FLPR core support in the |NCS| is currently :ref:`experimental<software_maturity>`.

> For samples targeting the FLPR core, program the application core, which subsequently programs the FLPR core.

Reviewer 4: Not true?

Author: Shantha asked for this edit @shanthanordic @masz-nordic  Could you please clarify this?

Author: Reverted

* ##List to be completed

.. _vpr_flpr_nrf54h20_initiating:

Using FLPR with Zephyr multithreaded mode
*****************************************

FLPR can function as a generic core, operating under the full Zephyr kernel.
In this configuration, building the FLPR target is similar to the application core.
However, the application core build must incorporate an overlay that enables the FLPR core.

Bootstrapping the FLPR core
===========================

The |NCS| provides a FLPR snippet that adds an overlay required for bootstrapping the FLPR core.
Snippet's primary function is to enable the code that transfers the FLPR code to the designated region (if necessary) and to initiate the FLPR core.

When building for the ``nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr`` target, a minimal sample is automatically loaded onto the application core.
See more information on :ref:`building_nrf54h_app_flpr_core`.

Memory allocation
*****************

If a FLPR CPU is running, it can lead to increased latency when accessing ``RAM_21``.
Because of this, when FLPR is used in a project, you should utilize ``RAM_21`` to store only the FLPR code, FLPR data, and the application CPU's non-time-sensitive information.

> Conversely, you should use ``RAM_0x`` to store data with strict access time requirements such as DMA buffers, and the application CPU data used in low-latency ISRs.

Author: @gmarull is RAM0x the correct one here?

Reviewer: @hubertmis ^

Standard build
--------------

This subsection focuses on how to build an application using :ref:`sysbuild <configuration_system_overview_sysbuild>`.

.. note::
   Currently, the documentation does not cover specific instructions for building an application image that uses sysbuild to incorporate the FLPR core as a sub-image.
   The only documented scenario is for building FLPR as the main image and the application as a sub-image.

Complete the following steps:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: Using minimal sample for VPR bootstrapping

      This option automatically programs the FLPR core with :ref:`dedicated bootstrapping firmware <vpr_flpr_nrf54h20_initiating>`.

      To build and flash both images, run the following command that performs a :ref:`pristine build <zephyr:west-building>`:

      .. code-block:: console

         west build -p -b nrf54h20dk/nrf54h20/cpuflpr
         west flash

   .. group-tab:: Using application that supports multi-image builds

      If your application involves creating custom images for both the application core and the FLPR core, make sure to disable the VPR bootstrapping sample.

>       You can do this by disabling the ``SB_CONFIG_VPR_LAUNCHER`` option when building for the FLPR target.

Author: @gmarull Please check if kconfig match, these were originally mentioned for 54L

Reviewer: they should be the same
